## General
- http to https
	- certBot stuff to get a web certificate
	- the website is doing something weird as a result of the https thing?
	- does this change how http requests within the server work?
	- figure out what caused the problem on the server connection.
		- it is NOT anything specific to the VM, it IS a thing in our hmv_test code
- we should come up with a server/client boundary for rabih
- what would we expect a maintainer to do? 
	- for everything they would do, we need documentation
	- Know the ways it will break and how to fix it
		- someone submits >1TB of files
		- someone gets access to server and deletes everything
			- make sure server has read-only access to repository
		- SSL certificate has to be renewed
		- someone downloads your datasets, people see each others' datasets
			- firebase lets us do authentication
			- definitely have a disclaimer
			- using https:
				- we can have datasets only access if they have the same session key (token) as when they uploaded
		- someone DDOSes it (does duke protect against this?)

## Calibration form
Information we need:
- indexed by: bone/limb name
- values:
	- what columns correspond to the data
	- what format are they? (quaternions/gyro+acc+magnet/delta quaternions/other permutations)

Assumed information (not on form):
- data is numbers
- data is floats multiplied by 1000
- data is arranged in columns (in the currently supported format)
	- Not true for Rabih's data, which is XML?
- data is per-limb

## Uploading/server side processing
- no matter what you submit, data processing is done once per file until the file is deleted due to timeout.
	- so we save data on the server machine, in quaternion format, then send it when requested.
