#### Misc ideas
	- NAMES. allow the user to put the name of the file as a parameter in the form
	- the actual filename is unique on the server side. when the user receives the files, they receive the filenames as titles that they gave.
	- readability is important, so we might want a context message explaining what data format 
	- tutorial:
		- what am i supposed to use this site for?
		- what is this site not?
		- what data formats are supported? how should i use them?
		- per-page explanations on how to do things
	- we should have documentation and tutorial
		- tutorial: written descriptions on all the pages
		- how to go from nothing to looking at my file (getting started)
	- also improve the website experience by making it intuitive
		- How to write options for quaternions
		- accessibility? this is a visual app
		- works on phone/ works on tablet? etc.
		- intuitive design: hamburger menu thing always takes you back home

#### Where should you go when you upload a file?
idea 1: the landing page is for showing the status of a file. 
	- It provides a link/redirects once we know the file is read
idea 2: the landing page and the visualizer are the same page
	- the last 'progress stage' is the visualizer itself
	- in this case, you would want to be see any file in progress in the file list.
	- BUT the directory 


#### Ideas on what we will work on in the coming week
jonathan 
	- merging file upload code together
	- says he will work on legs, also sophie maybe?
	- local quaternion widget on the calibration form
sophie
	- https and tutorial
	- maybe legs
sam
	- merging file upload code together
	- viewport + landing page integration
  - code refactoring / cleanup


#### What will later people need to modify? (So we will need to document in detail)

- server.js: new types of connections
- mess with cardItem.js: new types of cards
- look for magic numbers (and any other very basic code smells)
- local vs global quaternions: geometry transformations must make sense to readers
