sam-log-notes/sam-log.md, before:

## 5/30/2021
- I modified the file to use labelled command line arguments with optional flags.  I can still  produce the same output using `python graph-animate-transf.py data-samples/S1-Drill.dat --o 59 --max 2000 --float`.

## 5/29/2021 
- I've changed my mind about the transformations based on page 17 and page 20 of the [manual](http://www.opportunity-project.eu/system/files/MTi_and_MTx_User_Manual_and_Technical_Documentation.pdf). It says that the sensor coordinate system *S* is described **in  reference to** a world coordinate system *G*, and the rotation matrix uses the coordinates of the basis vectors of *S* in *G*-space as its columns, so the transformation must be from *G* to *S*.
- I just tried out the visualizer from testing custom data, with the right upper arm data from subject 1's drill run. It's really promising and I posted it on slack and saved it. I used the following command: `python graph-animate-transf.py data-samples/S1-Drill.dat 59 float 2000`. I really need to clean up this program because it is legitimately very useful.

## 5/28/2021
- Putting logs in reverse order of date now so that adding a new entry doesn't require scrolling all the way through the log.
- What have I promised for the meeting today? What do I plan on working on between now and Tuesday?
    - I will modify the code for generating/visualizing sample data so that the quaternions represent transformations **from local to global** space. Right now they are the other way around.
    - I will look into what we are missing between THREE.js space and OPPORTUNITY space in order to accurately transform an orientation from global opportunity space to global THREE space.
        - The best candidate for this transformation is a rotation around (1,1,1) of 120 degrees.
    - I will work with someone else to test out ideas for that.
    - I want to put some of the actual datset through the python visualizer to see how coherent the data is. It should give us a hint about what the orientation is supposed to look like on the webserver.
    - I briefly mentioned the idea of automatically pulling on the server whenever there's a push to master. If I want to look further into that, there's [a PHP solution from stack overflow](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/10542158/how-do-you-do-an-automatic-git-pull-on-remote-server/18053061).

## 5/27/2021
- I decided to go back to making sample data, since now I have more understanding of the format of OPPORTUNITY data.
    - A flaw with the previous format was that I didn't know what was represented by the 'twist' (w) component. 
- This time, I'm using a target 'up' and target 'forward' direction to construct a rotation matrix, which then gets transformed to a quaternion and put in (w,x,y,z) format like in the xSens readings in the dataset.
    - The procedure for generating the data is in [generate-reference-transf.py](../sample-test-data/generate-reference-transf.py) in the `generate_data_new()` function.
- The only good data right now is in [the sample data folder](../sample-test-data/data-samples/circle-with-up-control.txt). It has the same motion as last week, but with the extra constraint that local 'up' is always tangent to the circle.
- There's also a really ugly coded [python program](../sample-test-data/graph-animate-transf.py) which animates the (approximate) position, direction and orientation of the sensor given a file with quaternions in (w x y z) form. I'm considering trying it on some of the actual OPPORTUNITY dataset soon.
    - The program takes the text file you want to read as a command line argument.
- Now that I trust the data that has been generated, I want to see it on the model. When I use it directly, there are some strange effects, but the location of the arm definitely agrees with the expected location of the y (right) axis in sensor space.

## 5/25/2021
- I know that I can use the technique from Stack Overflow that Jonathan referenced in order to get the quaternion for pointing the x-axis in a specific direction, but how do I also control roll (model z-axis)? 
- I know how to do it with a rotation matrix: Know where the new 'forward' (x) and 'up' (z) axes will be, take their normalized cross product as y, and use these basis vectors as the columns of a rotation matrix. How do I express this rotation matrix as a quaternion?
- According to [this](http://www.euclideanspace.com/maths/geometry/rotations/conversions/matrixToQuaternion/) which is a website referenced in THREE.js documentation, there is a formula to do this, so I just might use it.

## 5/24/2021
- So if we have global data, our problem is that we don't really know which way the person is facing at t=0, we just know the global positions of each sensor.
- If we have local data, our problem is that we don't know the initial positions of the joints.
- Now that Jonathan's figured out and fixed the tiny issue that was preventing proper transformation of the arm, I can make a better table of what basis vector corresponds to what global arm heading.

| Vector | Arm direction | Shoulder direction |
|---|---|---|
| (1, 0, 0) | forward | in |
| (0, 1, 0) | up | back|
| (0, 0, 1) | out | up |

- the great news is that these form an easily understandable basis, and that the transformation quaternions used in GeneratedData.js are the same type of transformation as what is represented by the quaternion in the OPPORTUNITY dataset
    - so we need to transform from our xyz to opportunity's global xyz then to new orientation. There's also the 'local-to-global' transformation on the three.js side of things.
- the confusing news is that it seems we have x and z mixed up compared to what I expected.
    - that's only because of the 90 degree rotation about the y axis that jonathan implemented in order to account for ME using the wrong vectors for FORWARD and OUT when I generated the data.
    - I can fix it just by switching out the vectors used in generate-example-data.py
- I looked at Jonathan's notes on his attempts to use S4-ADL4.dat with the three.js model. I agree that we need to pre-apply a transform to get from global opportunity space *G* to three.js space *T*. What keeps confusing me is that we have two transformations from *G* but we need a chain of transformations from *G* to *S* to *T* or something similar (*S* is local space after a quaternion from the datset is applied). 
    - If we assume North = (1, 0, 0), we might just be able to (i) apply the quaternion from the opportunity dataset and (ii) swap the z and y coordinates and be done.
    - A given quaternion is just a rotation about an axis, where the axis has a North component, West component, and Up component, and we know the definition of these components in both coordinate systems *G* and *T*.

## 5/23/2021
- Having a small issue with pushing to git on a new branch. Git reports that I don't have permission, which is similar to when my SSH key is not configured. I'm making a small change to this repo to see if there's any issues pushing to this one.
- I downloaded the OPPORTUNITY 'challenge' dataset. It looks like the objective was to classify the activity for each section.
    - The legend for column labels in the challenge datset does NOT include any quaternion values, just 'gyro', 'magnetic' and 'acceleration'.
- I've made kind of a breakthrough in what to make of the quaternions because the website for the opportunity dataset as a [Q&A](http://www.opportunity-project.eu/node/53.html) section which links the manual for the sensors used. The quaternion represents the transformation from global coordinates to local coordinates.
![transformation](alignment-info.png)
- The quaternions are represented as (cos(alpha/2), **n**sin(alpha/2)) where **n** is the axis of rotation. Thus, the identity quaternion (1, 0, 0, 0) means that the front of the sensor (the part that the wire is NOT sticking out of, which faces *down* the arm) is pointed toward local magnetic north. Since the state of a bone is determined by shoulder position and bone orientation, that's enough info to know where to point the bone, IFF we assume a direction for magnetic north.

## 5/22/2021
- I'm having trouble running the React server locally. Viewport.js tries to open an HTML file and parse it as JSON, then produces an exception, and I don't get past the model loading screen. Is there some package I need to  make sure to install? I already ran `npm install` and that allowed me to boot up the server locally in the first place with `npm start`.
- I've looked at the interpretation of the generated dataset in GenerateData.js and it seems to make a figure-8 pattern instead of a circle like it should. Additionally, it seems to be inaccurate on the very first time step.
    - The first time step should have the arm angled upward and centered front-to-back, but it seems not to be angled horizontally.
    - The twist on the upper arm should be constant such that the shoulder always faces upward but that is not happening right now.
    - The stack overflow page says we should use the size of the hypoteneuse between the arm vector and the target vector plus the dot product. ~~However, since both vectors are normalized, the hypoteneuse length should be sqrt(2) rather than 1, right?~~ You use the square root of the product of the lengths of the two vectors, which in this case is 1.
- I'm still not decided on whether the data interpreted by the visualizer should be in axis-angle form or standard orientation quaternion form. The best one is whichever requires the fewest calculations per frame (if the computation time there is important compared to other per-frame operations).
- It's also possible that we're making a figure 8 because the data actually makes a figure 8 instead of a circle. I am going to graph the points to verify that they correctly make a circle.
    - I've used graph-example-data.py to verify that output.txt traces out a circle in the plane orthogonal to v_out.
- It seems that the data does trace out a circle -- the vector pointing out of the top of the shoulder makes a circle on the horizontal plane, which makes sense since the shoulder is the 'direction' of the right upper arm.
- I mapped out how each axis vector causes the model's RUA to behave:

| Vector | Arm direction | Shoulder direction |
|---|---|---|
| (1, 0, 0) | up | back |
| (0, 1, 0) | down, out | back|
| (0, 0, 1) | out | up |

- This is super confusing and I'm trying to figure out the justification--maybe the shoulder isn't involved like I think it is, but when I use the back of the upper arm as a reference point, it also has a habit of pointing in the same direction twice.
- I'm going to give it a try using the arm position as my guide, but that doesn't really work because I don't have three linearly independent arm positions. None of them point forward or backward, so how can a mixture of them do so?
- I tried using the cross product and w from stack overflow in the generated data implementation and making a quaternion using THREE's `setFromAxisAngle` function, but that did not change anything. The implication is that the cross product handles the axis-angle aspect of setting the quaternion's x,y,z values. 
- Next idea: Judging by the scene from the fall semester's project, positive x is the left-hand side from the model's perspective (so the right arm points in direction (-1,0,0)) which means that we might want to calculate the rotation from (-1,0,0) to the relevant vector.
    - The result is that the arm is rotated 90 degrees toward the back along the sagittal plane. (90 degrees counterclockwise about (1,0,0)).
- At the moment I am very confused as to how to reliably move the arm in the z-axis if the three unit vectors produce arm locations that are not all linearly dependent. My next plan is to look into lookAt matrices and making quaternions from them, since that is the hack that kind of works in [some earlier tests](https://github.com/jpiland16/hmv-scratchpad/tree/master/sam-lookat-notes).

Commit message:

add notes about transformation from opporutnity to three space

sam-log-notes/sam-log.md, after:

## 5/31/2021
- I recycled the functions from the python animator into a quick tester for quaternion transformations to see what set of transformations will get from sensor space to three.js space.
    - For quaternion **q = (w,x,y,z) = (1/2, -1/2, -1/2, -1/2)** and vector **v** in OPPORTUNITY space, **qv** is the corresponding vector in THREE space. This is demonstrated quickly by `../sample-test-data/utils/quat-operations.py`.
    - By OPPORTUNITY space, I mean that x points toward the camera, y points to camera right, and z points up. By THREE space, I mean that x points toward camera right, y points up, and z points toward the camera.
    - When I use this transformation in Sophie's lab from today (which is really promising) it does NOT cause the orientations of bones to be **qv**. I haven't tried it yet with one bone at a time. 
    - This probably has to do with the parent-child connection between bone orientations, but I thought that was accounted for because we're using global-to-local translation and the bones are manipulated in topological order (parent before child).

## 5/30/2021
- I modified the file to use labelled command line arguments with optional flags.  I can still  produce the same output using `python graph-animate-transf.py data-samples/S1-Drill.dat --o 59 --max 2000 --float`.

## 5/29/2021 
- I've changed my mind about the transformations based on page 17 and page 20 of the [manual](http://www.opportunity-project.eu/system/files/MTi_and_MTx_User_Manual_and_Technical_Documentation.pdf). It says that the sensor coordinate system *S* is described **in  reference to** a world coordinate system *G*, and the rotation matrix uses the coordinates of the basis vectors of *S* in *G*-space as its columns, so the transformation must be from *G* to *S*.
- I just tried out the visualizer from testing custom data, with the right upper arm data from subject 1's drill run. It's really promising and I posted it on slack and saved it. I used the following command: `python graph-animate-transf.py data-samples/S1-Drill.dat 59 float 2000`. I really need to clean up this program because it is legitimately very useful.

## 5/28/2021
- Putting logs in reverse order of date now so that adding a new entry doesn't require scrolling all the way through the log.
- What have I promised for the meeting today? What do I plan on working on between now and Tuesday?
    - I will modify the code for generating/visualizing sample data so that the quaternions represent transformations **from local to global** space. Right now they are the other way around.
    - I will look into what we are missing between THREE.js space and OPPORTUNITY space in order to accurately transform an orientation from global opportunity space to global THREE space.
        - The best candidate for this transformation is a rotation around (1,1,1) of 120 degrees.
    - I will work with someone else to test out ideas for that.
    - I want to put some of the actual datset through the python visualizer to see how coherent the data is. It should give us a hint about what the orientation is supposed to look like on the webserver.
    - I briefly mentioned the idea of automatically pulling on the server whenever there's a push to master. If I want to look further into that, there's [a PHP solution from stack overflow](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/10542158/how-do-you-do-an-automatic-git-pull-on-remote-server/18053061).

## 5/27/2021
- I decided to go back to making sample data, since now I have more understanding of the format of OPPORTUNITY data.
    - A flaw with the previous format was that I didn't know what was represented by the 'twist' (w) component. 
- This time, I'm using a target 'up' and target 'forward' direction to construct a rotation matrix, which then gets transformed to a quaternion and put in (w,x,y,z) format like in the xSens readings in the dataset.
    - The procedure for generating the data is in [generate-reference-transf.py](../sample-test-data/generate-reference-transf.py) in the `generate_data_new()` function.
- The only good data right now is in [the sample data folder](../sample-test-data/data-samples/circle-with-up-control.txt). It has the same motion as last week, but with the extra constraint that local 'up' is always tangent to the circle.
- There's also a really ugly coded [python program](../sample-test-data/graph-animate-transf.py) which animates the (approximate) position, direction and orientation of the sensor given a file with quaternions in (w x y z) form. I'm considering trying it on some of the actual OPPORTUNITY dataset soon.
    - The program takes the text file you want to read as a command line argument.
- Now that I trust the data that has been generated, I want to see it on the model. When I use it directly, there are some strange effects, but the location of the arm definitely agrees with the expected location of the y (right) axis in sensor space.

## 5/25/2021
- I know that I can use the technique from Stack Overflow that Jonathan referenced in order to get the quaternion for pointing the x-axis in a specific direction, but how do I also control roll (model z-axis)? 
- I know how to do it with a rotation matrix: Know where the new 'forward' (x) and 'up' (z) axes will be, take their normalized cross product as y, and use these basis vectors as the columns of a rotation matrix. How do I express this rotation matrix as a quaternion?
- According to [this](http://www.euclideanspace.com/maths/geometry/rotations/conversions/matrixToQuaternion/) which is a website referenced in THREE.js documentation, there is a formula to do this, so I just might use it.

## 5/24/2021
- So if we have global data, our problem is that we don't really know which way the person is facing at t=0, we just know the global positions of each sensor.
- If we have local data, our problem is that we don't know the initial positions of the joints.
- Now that Jonathan's figured out and fixed the tiny issue that was preventing proper transformation of the arm, I can make a better table of what basis vector corresponds to what global arm heading.

| Vector | Arm direction | Shoulder direction |
|---|---|---|
| (1, 0, 0) | forward | in |
| (0, 1, 0) | up | back|
| (0, 0, 1) | out | up |

- the great news is that these form an easily understandable basis, and that the transformation quaternions used in GeneratedData.js are the same type of transformation as what is represented by the quaternion in the OPPORTUNITY dataset
    - so we need to transform from our xyz to opportunity's global xyz then to new orientation. There's also the 'local-to-global' transformation on the three.js side of things.
- the confusing news is that it seems we have x and z mixed up compared to what I expected.
    - that's only because of the 90 degree rotation about the y axis that jonathan implemented in order to account for ME using the wrong vectors for FORWARD and OUT when I generated the data.
    - I can fix it just by switching out the vectors used in generate-example-data.py
- I looked at Jonathan's notes on his attempts to use S4-ADL4.dat with the three.js model. I agree that we need to pre-apply a transform to get from global opportunity space *G* to three.js space *T*. What keeps confusing me is that we have two transformations from *G* but we need a chain of transformations from *G* to *S* to *T* or something similar (*S* is local space after a quaternion from the datset is applied). 
    - If we assume North = (1, 0, 0), we might just be able to (i) apply the quaternion from the opportunity dataset and (ii) swap the z and y coordinates and be done.
    - A given quaternion is just a rotation about an axis, where the axis has a North component, West component, and Up component, and we know the definition of these components in both coordinate systems *G* and *T*.

## 5/23/2021
- Having a small issue with pushing to git on a new branch. Git reports that I don't have permission, which is similar to when my SSH key is not configured. I'm making a small change to this repo to see if there's any issues pushing to this one.
- I downloaded the OPPORTUNITY 'challenge' dataset. It looks like the objective was to classify the activity for each section.
    - The legend for column labels in the challenge datset does NOT include any quaternion values, just 'gyro', 'magnetic' and 'acceleration'.
- I've made kind of a breakthrough in what to make of the quaternions because the website for the opportunity dataset as a [Q&A](http://www.opportunity-project.eu/node/53.html) section which links the manual for the sensors used. The quaternion represents the transformation from global coordinates to local coordinates.
![transformation](alignment-info.png)
- The quaternions are represented as (cos(alpha/2), **n**sin(alpha/2)) where **n** is the axis of rotation. Thus, the identity quaternion (1, 0, 0, 0) means that the front of the sensor (the part that the wire is NOT sticking out of, which faces *down* the arm) is pointed toward local magnetic north. Since the state of a bone is determined by shoulder position and bone orientation, that's enough info to know where to point the bone, IFF we assume a direction for magnetic north.

## 5/22/2021
- I'm having trouble running the React server locally. Viewport.js tries to open an HTML file and parse it as JSON, then produces an exception, and I don't get past the model loading screen. Is there some package I need to  make sure to install? I already ran `npm install` and that allowed me to boot up the server locally in the first place with `npm start`.
- I've looked at the interpretation of the generated dataset in GenerateData.js and it seems to make a figure-8 pattern instead of a circle like it should. Additionally, it seems to be inaccurate on the very first time step.
    - The first time step should have the arm angled upward and centered front-to-back, but it seems not to be angled horizontally.
    - The twist on the upper arm should be constant such that the shoulder always faces upward but that is not happening right now.
    - The stack overflow page says we should use the size of the hypoteneuse between the arm vector and the target vector plus the dot product. ~~However, since both vectors are normalized, the hypoteneuse length should be sqrt(2) rather than 1, right?~~ You use the square root of the product of the lengths of the two vectors, which in this case is 1.
- I'm still not decided on whether the data interpreted by the visualizer should be in axis-angle form or standard orientation quaternion form. The best one is whichever requires the fewest calculations per frame (if the computation time there is important compared to other per-frame operations).
- It's also possible that we're making a figure 8 because the data actually makes a figure 8 instead of a circle. I am going to graph the points to verify that they correctly make a circle.
    - I've used graph-example-data.py to verify that output.txt traces out a circle in the plane orthogonal to v_out.
- It seems that the data does trace out a circle -- the vector pointing out of the top of the shoulder makes a circle on the horizontal plane, which makes sense since the shoulder is the 'direction' of the right upper arm.
- I mapped out how each axis vector causes the model's RUA to behave:

| Vector | Arm direction | Shoulder direction |
|---|---|---|
| (1, 0, 0) | up | back |
| (0, 1, 0) | down, out | back|
| (0, 0, 1) | out | up |

- This is super confusing and I'm trying to figure out the justification--maybe the shoulder isn't involved like I think it is, but when I use the back of the upper arm as a reference point, it also has a habit of pointing in the same direction twice.
- I'm going to give it a try using the arm position as my guide, but that doesn't really work because I don't have three linearly independent arm positions. None of them point forward or backward, so how can a mixture of them do so?
- I tried using the cross product and w from stack overflow in the generated data implementation and making a quaternion using THREE's `setFromAxisAngle` function, but that did not change anything. The implication is that the cross product handles the axis-angle aspect of setting the quaternion's x,y,z values. 
- Next idea: Judging by the scene from the fall semester's project, positive x is the left-hand side from the model's perspective (so the right arm points in direction (-1,0,0)) which means that we might want to calculate the rotation from (-1,0,0) to the relevant vector.
    - The result is that the arm is rotated 90 degrees toward the back along the sagittal plane. (90 degrees counterclockwise about (1,0,0)).
- At the moment I am very confused as to how to reliably move the arm in the z-axis if the three unit vectors produce arm locations that are not all linearly dependent. My next plan is to look into lookAt matrices and making quaternions from them, since that is the hack that kind of works in [some earlier tests](https://github.com/jpiland16/hmv-scratchpad/tree/master/sam-lookat-notes).
